Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse
Radiance Probes
ROULI FREEMAN, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
ALEXANDER SANNIKOV, Grinding Gear Games, New Zealand
Single frame

Accumulated

Multibounce

Reference

Fig. 1. Showcase of Split Radiance Cascades (Split RC) calculating a single bounce of indirect illumination for the San Miguel scene. “Single frame” shows
the result of Split RC after a single frame of calculation; “Accumulated” is a result after 10 frames of temporal accumulation; “Multibounce” adds a secondary
offscreen cache for multiple bounces of indirect lighting; “Reference” shows a path-traced reference. Runtime for Split RC in “Single frame” is 13.2ms, of
which 6.1ms consists of 1spp raytracing.
Radiance probe methods are a popular and well-tested approach for approxi­
mating diffuse global illumination for real-time graphics, but they commonly
suffer from a lack of detail due to the large spacing between probes. Radi­
ance Cascades (RC) fixes this by increasing spatial resolution and reducing
angular resolution for light and occlusion from closer objects, which allows
it to provide details at all scales without noise or aliasing. However, leading
implementations of RC either run in 2D or screenspace, due to the prohibitive
costs of storing high-detail volumetric radiance information.
In this work, we adapt Radiance Cascades for accurate real-time 3D diffuse
global illumination using a sparse hashmap to store world-space probes. We
introduce ray splitting, a method for calculating radiance intervals used in
RC by tracing rays from visible surfaces and calculating their contribution
to cascades based on their hit distance. We evaluate our algorithm, Split
Radiance Cascades, on a variety of scenes, and demonstrate that it can provide
high-quality indirect illumination in both single-frame and temporally accu­
mulated contexts.

1 Introduction
Computing accurate global illumination (GI) in real-time is one
of the greatest problems of computer graphics. For a long time,
games have had to rely on precomputed lighting approximations
to achieve high visual quality, which makes dynamic changes to
the scene difficult to depict realistically. The primary problem with
GI is that all surfaces effectively are emissive due to the multiple
bounces of light, which results in quadratic complexity from inter­
actions between all pairs of surfaces visible to each other.
This problem is commonly split into separate steps which solve
specular/glossy and diffuse illumination and are combined to pro­
duce the full result. Specular effects are (usually) highly directional
and so can be handled efficiently by sampling the BRDF; in con­
trast, diffuse effects require gathering light from all directions in
the visible hemisphere, however they can be temporally accumu­
lated easily due to being view-independent. We will only consider
diffuse effects in this work.

2 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

Irradiance probes [Greger et al. 1998] have frequently been used
as a solution to this problem. While their use in game engines has
historically involved precomputation, methods such as Dynamic
Diffuse Global Illumination (DDGI) [Majercik et al. 2019] have been
introduced which calculate irradiance at probes dynamically using
raytracing. Additionally, by storing information for all surfaces
near the camera, DDGI can efficiently approximate multibounce
diffuse effects by feeding bounce information from previous frames
into later invocations of the algorithm temporally. However, to
avoid noise, (ir)radiance probe methods commonly have a low
spatial resolution and so cannot resolve small-scale effects such as
ambient occlusion.
Radiance Cascades (RC) [Sannikov 2023] are a variant of radiance
probes which introduces multiple co-located cascades of probes,
which each provides radiance and transmittance information from
a different distance interval. By storing cascades which track
faraway objects with a lower spatial resolution but higher angular
resolution, and vice versa for nearby objects, RC can minimize
error for effects caused by occluders at all distances. RC delivers
state of the art results in 2D, as can be seen in games such as Core
Keeper and Kyora, and has been demonstrated as a screenspace GI
algorithm to great effect in Path of Exile 2. However, it has not been
explored much for full 3D diffuse illumination including offscreen
lights and multiple bounces.
In this work, we first adapt Radiance Cascades for 3D using a
sparse hashmap to store probes near surfaces, and sparse trilinear
interpolation to calculate irradiance per-pixel. We use multiple
levels of detail similarly to cascaded shadow maps [Dimitrov 2007]
to ensure constant visual size of probes onscreen. We then develop
ray splitting, a method of converting full rays into ray intervals for
use in RC, and adjust the algorithm to randomly trace rays from
visible surfaces and use the intervals to populate the RC data struc­
ture in a similar manner to SHaRC [NVIDIA 2024] or hashed path
space filtering [Binder et al. 2021]. This avoids having to calculate
intervals for each cascade separately, which reduces raytracing
cost by the total number of cascades. As this approach requires an
even distribution of rays, we demonstrate a method to choose ray
directions which ensures uniform coverage across all cascades. We
evaluate our full algorithm, Split Radiance Cascades (Split RC), and
demonstrate that it is capable of providing accurate one-bounce
results in real-time with only a single frame of calculation while
also being capable of temporal accumulation for increased quality
and further bounces.

2 Related Work
Work on global illumination spans several decades. Ritschel et al.
[2012] provides a summary of approaches up to 2012. Recently,
methods utilizing monte-carlo raytracing and spatiotemporal reuse
[Ouyang et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022] have gained popularity as they
reliably converge to the reference solution; however for real-time
applications, they rely heavily on temporal accumulation, per-pixel
reprojection, and denoisers. As managing the resulting tradeoffs is
beyond the scope of our paper, we will primarily focus on other
algorithms that bear more similarity to our approach.

(Ir)radiance Probes. Irradiance probe volumes have been used
in game engines frequently as a precomputed approximation of
diffuse global illumination since their introduction in Greger et
al. [1998]. Storing directional radiance (such as via spherical
harmonics) instead of irradiance to render specular effects has
also been explored [Krivanek et al. 2005]. More recently, these
techniques have been adapted for dynamic environments and realtime calculation. DDGI [Majercik et al. 2019; Majercik et al. 2021]
utilizes raytracing in order to update probes in real-time, and stores
additional depth moments to prevent light leaking by modifying
the interpolation function. Due to probe volumes scaling cubically
with resolution, recent techniques have focused on storing radi­
ance only near surfaces, either via surfels [Halen et al. 2021],
sparse hashmaps [NVIDIA 2024], or texture mapping [Tatzgern et
al. 2024]. Techniques such as Lumen [Wright et al. 2022] and GI-1.0
[Boissé et al. 2023] use an additional screenspace radiance cache for
first-bounce lighting to prevent the detail loss from the low spatial
resolution of most world-space probes.
Radiance Cascades. The original Radiance Cascades paper [San­
nikov 2023] provides formulations of RC for 2D, pure screenspace,
and screenspace with world-space raytracing. Osborne and San­
nikov [2024] introduces the bilinear fix method which removes
ringing artifacts in 2D implementations. Holographic Radiance
Cascades [Freeman et al. 2025] is a variant of RC which utilizes
anisotropic probe layouts to eliminate ray gaps larger than the
base cascade probe spacing, which results in every cascade having
the same accuracy; however, achieving the same effect in 3D is
problematic as it would require 𝑂(𝑥4 ) memory for a scene 𝑥 times
the base cascade probe spacing in size.
There have been three fully-3D variants of RC for global illumi­
nation. Mathis [2024] stores probes in 2D using texture mapping,
which allows the problem to be considered identically to 2D
RC. Surfel RC [Coppen 2025] uses surfels to initialize probes on
surfaces, however interpolation artifacts are noticeable (although
the painterly look may be a feature for some aesthetics). Love and
Deepspace utilizes Radiance Cascades in 3D [Ruan 2026] to increase
the efficiency of standard irradiance probes for use on mobile
devices.
Path Space Filtering. Binder et al. [2021] traces rays from the cam­
era, and then averages similar rays together using a world-space
voxel hashmap and atomic operations. To avoid discretization arti­
facts, it jitters query and inserted ray positions. SHaRC [NVIDIA
2024] utilizes a similar hashmap structure with multiple levels of
detail and no jittering; it is targeted towards second-bounce effects,
so artifacts are much less noticeable as the cache is not directly
displayed on-screen.

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 3

Table 1. Terminology used throughout this paper.

Symbol

Definition

𝐿(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 )

Radiance leaving a point 𝐱 in direction 𝜔𝑜

𝐿𝑒 (𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 )

Emission from a point 𝐱 in direction 𝜔𝑜

𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔𝑖 )

Incident radiance at a point 𝐱 from direction 𝜔𝑖

⃗
𝒏(𝐱)

Normal vector at a point 𝐱

𝜌(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 , 𝜔𝑖 )

Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function
(BRDF)

Ω(𝐱)

Hemisphere of directions facing away from the
surface at point 𝐱

𝑋𝐼

Set of radiance probe positions

Ω𝐼

Set of ray directions per probe

𝐼(𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )

Computed incident radiance for probe 𝐩 ∈ 𝑋 𝐼
and direction 𝜔𝑝 ∈ Ω𝐼

Δ𝑠

Spacing between radiance probes

Δ𝜔

Average spacing between ray directions at some
distance

𝑁

Total number of cascades

𝑋𝑛𝐼 , Ω𝐼𝑛 ,
Δ𝑠𝑛 , Δ𝜔
𝑛

Values of 𝑋 𝐼 , Ω𝐼 , Δ𝑠 , Δ𝜔 for cascade 𝑛

𝑡𝑛

Ray cutoff length for cascade 𝑛

𝐾

Ray direction count (|Ω𝐼𝑛 |) increase per cascade
(aka. branching factor)

𝑙

Ray length (𝑡𝑛 ) increase
(aka. length scaling coefficient)

per

cascade

𝐽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )

Computed radiance
𝑡𝑛−1 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑛

the

interval

𝛽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )

Computed transmittance across the interval
𝑡𝑛−1 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑛

𝐼𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )

Average radiance in the cone around direction
𝜔𝑝 , for distances 𝑡 > 𝑡𝑛−1

𝑚𝑛 (𝜔)

The nearest direction in Ω𝐼𝑛 to some direction 𝜔

along

3 Background
One of the main goals of graphics is approximating the rendering
equation [Kajiya 1986] for radiance reflecting off surfaces:
𝐿(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 ) = 𝐿𝑒 (𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 )
+∫

⃗
𝜌(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 , 𝜔𝑖 )𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔𝑖 ) (𝜔𝑖 ⋅ 𝒏(𝐱))𝑑𝜔
𝑖

(1)

Ω(𝐱)

This defines the radiance 𝐿 at position 𝐱 in the direction 𝜔𝑜 as a
⃗
function of the emission 𝐿𝑒 , incident radiance 𝐿𝑖 , the normal 𝒏(𝐱)
at the position, and the BRDF 𝜌, integrated over the hemisphere
Ω(𝐱) of directions facing away from the surface at that point. The
incident radiance 𝐿𝑖 is then a function of 𝐿 at another location;

specifically, we can write it as 𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔) = 𝐿(𝐱 + 𝑡 ⋅ 𝜔, −𝜔), where
𝑡 is the distance to the first collision for a ray starting at 𝐱 in the
direction 𝜔.
As a consequence of this formulation, radiance is defined in
terms of itself. In order to avoid the recursive dependence, we
split radiance into multiple bounces, where each bounce uses the
previous bounce as the incident radiance. The solution to the ren­
dering equation can be calculated by repeating this process until
convergence.
For the purposes of our algorithm, we will focus on calculating
a single bounce of radiance. Our algorithm supports gathering dif­
fuse illumination at arbitrary surface locations rather than purely
on-screen like some final gathering methods, so we can easily rerun
it multiple times or feed the output into itself temporally to get
multiple bounces.

3.1 Radiance Probes
Radiance probe methods approximate 𝐿 by discretizing the sample
space over which the incident radiance 𝐿𝑖 is calculated. This is
important as computing 𝐿𝑖 requires a ray trace (or an equivalent
operation), which is expensive and can make up a large portion of
the runtime.
Formally, we calculate 𝐼(𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 𝐿𝑖 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) for all probe posi­
tions 𝐩 in some finite set 𝑋 𝐼 and ray directions 𝜔𝑝 in a set of evenly
spaced unit vectors Ω𝐼 . Then, we can replace the hemisphere
integral in Eq. 1 with a sum over the discretized angles:
2𝜋
∑
𝜌(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 , 𝜔𝑝 )
|Ω𝐼 ∩ Ω(𝐱)| 𝜔 ∈Ω𝐼 ∩Ω(𝐱)
(2)
𝑝
⃗
⋅ 𝐈𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐫𝐩(𝐼)(𝐱, 𝜔𝑝 ) (𝜔𝑝 ⋅ 𝒏(𝐱))
The position at which we calculate radiance is unlikely to coincide
with one of the probes, so we extend the function 𝐼 to all surface
points using some interpolation method 𝐈𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐫𝐩. For example, a
simple method would be trilinear interpolation, if we have probes
spaced in a uniform 3D grid: 𝑋 𝐼 ⊂ {Δ𝑠 𝑣 | 𝑣 ∈ ℤ3 }, where Δ𝑠
is the average probe spacing. However, trilinear results in light
leaking artifacts when there are surfaces thinner than the probe
spacing. One way of fixing this would be to only interpolate probes
which are visible from the sample position [Majercik et al. 2019].
Then, if we need to calculate radiance within a volume of
size 𝑉 , the total amount of work necessary is approximately
𝑂(|Ω𝐼 | 𝑉 /(Δ𝑠 )3 ), assuming that the greatest cost is in the ray­
tracing to compute 𝐼.
There are two main unavoidable forms of artifacts for radiance
probe techniques: angular and spatial errors. Consider a probe
spaced a distance 𝑡 away from an emitter. Then, near the emitter,
we have average spacing between rays,
Δ𝜔 = 𝑡√

4𝜋
|Ω𝐼 |

(3)

so if the size of the emitter is less than this, we are likely to miss it.
This type of error results in streaks of light, as shown in Fig. 2, or
noise if the ray directions vary between probes.

4 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

Δ𝜔

But there is no reason we need to stick with only two levels
of detail: if we can accurately combine information from probe
grids with exponentially increasing cutoff lengths, we could get
something that provides close-to-optimal detail for light sources
and occluders at any distance. This is the core idea behind Radiance
Cascades.

𝑡

Fig. 2. A scene with an occluder and an emitter, with lighting calculated
using a small number of directions. The angular error is larger than the
emitter, so the blue probe receives no radiance.

Similarly, consider an occluder near the probe. If the occluder is
smaller than the probe spacing Δ𝑠 , we have no guarantee that any
of the rays towards the emitter will first hit the occluder, which
results in light leaking and missed shadows for positions interpo­
lated from the probes, as shown in Fig. 3.

3.2 Radiance Cascades
Radiance Cascades [Sannikov 2023; Osborne and Sannikov 2024]
tracks multiple overlapping cascades of radiance probes: Starting
from a base grid with spacing Δ𝑠0 , set of directions Ω𝐼0 , and ray
cutoff length 𝑡0 , each higher cascade exponentially increases these
values. Specifically, we have for the 𝑛th cascade,
Δ𝑠𝑛 = Δ𝑠0 ⋅ 2𝑛
|Ω𝐼𝑛 | = |Ω𝐼0 | ⋅ 𝐾 𝑛

(4)

𝑛

Δ𝑠

Fig. 3. The same scene as the previous diagram, but with a large probe
spacing and high angular resolution instead. The occluder is not picked up
as it is between probes, resulting in light leaking.

Therefore, to reduce the resolvable object size, we seek to minimize
max(Δ𝑠 , Δ𝜔 ). Note that depending on the specific circumstances
(such as what denoiser is being used), the noise from large angular
error could appear worse than the blurring and leaking from spatial
error or vice versa, so the specific scaling of each may vary; but for
our algorithm this heuristic has worked well. As we have a finite
computational budget, we can achieve this best by setting Δ𝑠 =
Δ𝜔 . Unfortunately, Δ𝜔 is not constant; it scales linearly with the
distance from the probe (see Eq. 3), so as the distance to emitters
increases, |Ω𝐼 | also has to increase, and due to the finite computa­
tional budget, Δ𝑠 as well.
Normal radiance probe techniques have to consider longdistance light sources in order to do global illumination; as a
consequence, they usually have a low spatial resolution to avoid
noise, and cannot provide high-frequency details such as shadow­
ing within areas smaller than the spacing.
This is not the case for all algorithms. Consider ambient occlu­
sion (AO) techniques: Instead of concerning itself with distant
sources, AO assumes that radiance from beyond a certain radius is
uniform, and so only calculates visibility within a local area. This
can be done by tracing a few short rays (as due to the length, they
have a low angular error), and so it can be calculated per-pixel in
a reasonable amount of time.
In real-time graphics, these two techniques are commonly com­
bined to approximate global illumination, as AO can add back some
of the high-frequency detail that irradiance probes miss. However,
there is a gap between the detail levels handled by both techniques,
which makes the combined algorithm unable to handle effects such
as soft penumbras.

𝑡𝑛 = 𝑡0 ⋅ 𝑙
for some branching factor 𝐾 and length scaling coefficient 𝑙. We
need to be slightly careful about the probe positions: as we will
be using trilinear interpolation, we offset each cascade to evenly
distribute error: 𝑋𝑛𝐼 ⊂ {Δ𝑠𝑛 (𝑣 + 12 ) | 𝑣 ∈ ℤ3 }. We will also want
the same property for the directions. An example configuration for
2D is shown in Fig. 4.
The angular error at the end of rays is thus:
𝑛

Δ𝜔
𝑛 = 𝑡𝑛 √

4𝜋
𝑙
= ( √ ) Δ𝜔
0
|Ω𝐼𝑛 |
𝐾

(5)

So, setting 𝐾 = 4 and 𝑙 = 4 results in Δ𝜔 scaling as 2𝑛 , and
𝑠
then adjusting 𝑡0 allows us to achieve Δ𝜔
𝑛 = Δ𝑛 for all cascades.
Prior to this work, most RC implementations have actually aimed
for constant Δ𝜔 across cascades by setting 𝑙 = 2, however in our
experiments aiming for equal angular and spatial error using 𝑙 = 4
reduces artifacts significantly, as we demonstrate in Appendix A.

Fig. 4. The first three cascades of probes and the rays computed in them
for 2D Radiance Cascades, using settings 𝐾 = 𝑙 = 2, |Ω𝐼0 | = 4. Probe posi­
tions are offset to reduce aliasing.

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 5

Now, consider a ray traced from some position 𝐱 in direction 𝜔
to calculate the incident radiance 𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔). We can split this ray
into multiple segments: if the first occluder is between distance 0
and 𝑡0 from 𝐱, then the ray takes on the radiance at it. Otherwise,
if there is an occluder from 𝑡0 to 𝑡1 , the ray takes on the radiance at
that occluder, and so on. More generally, if the segment from 0 to
𝑡0 provides additional radiance 𝐽 and transmits 𝛽 amount of light
from beyond 𝑡0 , we can merge the segment with the rest of the ray
using the following equation:
𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔) = 𝐽 + 𝛽 ⋅ 𝐿𝑖 (𝐱 + 𝑡0 ⋅ 𝜔, 𝜔)
(6)
Note that this is identical to the equation for premultiplied alpha
compositing [Porter and Duff 1984] using 𝛼 = 1 − 𝛽.
This drives our idea of what data should be stored at each
cascade: For position 𝐩 ∈ 𝑋𝑛𝐼 and direction 𝜔𝑝 ∈ Ω𝐼𝑛 , we calculate
the transmittance 𝛽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) as 0 if there is an occluder within
the interval 𝐩 + 𝑡 ⋅ 𝜔𝑝 , 𝑡𝑛−1 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑛 (where for convenience we
set 𝑡−1 = 0), and 1 otherwise. Similarly, if the first hit along the
interval is at distance 𝑡𝑖 , the radiance interval is computed as
𝐽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 𝐿(𝐩 + 𝑡𝑖 ⋅ 𝜔𝑝 , −𝜔𝑝 ); and otherwise 𝟎 if there is no
hit. None of this cares about distances closer than 𝑡𝑛−1 , which
prevents issues such as a small occluder overlapping with a probe
and shadowing all of its rays. For a more in-depth treatment of
radiance intervals, see Sannikov [2023] and Osborne and Sannikov
[2024].
We then have a very simple algorithm for calculating the radi­
ance: For every position 𝐱, and direction 𝜔, we can interpolate the
nearest probes and directions for each cascade level 𝑛 to approx­
imate radiance and transmittance intervals 𝐽𝑛 , 𝛽𝑛 for the ray
segment from 𝑡𝑛−1 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑛 and merge these from back to front to
compute the incident radiance 𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔) using Eq. 6. We can then
use many of these samples to integrate the rendering equation
(Eq. 1). But while this does not require any additional ray tracing, in
order to get the benefits of the angular resolution of the 𝑛th cascade
we would need to use |Ω𝐼𝑛 | directions, which is computationally
infeasible. So, we can only use this procedure when the BRDF is
highly anisotropic and the number of directions which contribute
to the radiance is small.
For a diffuse BRDF, we need a different approach. Since the
⃗
multiplier term in the rendering equation 𝜌(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 , 𝜔𝑖 )(𝜔𝑖 ⋅ 𝒏(𝐱))
is smooth, we can get high quality estimations by discretizing
over a small number of sample directions, so long as the radiance
stored for each direction averages the incident radiance across a
wide angle rather than containing a single sample. So, we define
𝐼𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) for each cascade as an approximation to the average
radiance across all angles closer to 𝜔𝑝 than any other element of
Ω𝐼𝑛 , from distances further than 𝑡𝑛−1 (so that 𝐼0 averages the full
radiance starting from 0). We can then compute this by combining
the cones for the higher cascade within the area and merging
with the traced radiance interval using Eq. 6. Define 𝑚𝑛 (𝜔) as the
function mapping a direction 𝜔 to the nearest direction in Ω𝐼𝑛 , and
𝐼
define 𝑚−1
𝑛 (𝜔𝑝 ) = {𝜔𝑞 ∈ Ω𝑛+1 | 𝑚𝑛 (𝜔𝑞 ) = 𝜔𝑝 }. Then, we have:
𝐼𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 𝐽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )
𝐈𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐫𝐩(𝐼𝑛+1 )(𝐩, 𝜔𝑞 )
(7)
+𝛽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 )
∑
|𝑚−1
𝑛 (𝜔𝑝 )|
𝜔 ∈𝑚−1 (𝜔 )
𝑞

𝑛

𝑝

Fig. 5. The 𝐽𝑛 and 𝛽𝑛 intervals merged to compute radiance at a point for
the probe structure in Fig. 4. One of the calculated cones 𝐼𝑛 is also shown
per cascade.

We visualize this for 2D RC in Fig. 5. Finally, we calculate the radi­
ance 𝐿(𝐱, 𝜔) via the same approach as in normal radiance probes
(Eq. 2), using the same interpolation function to estimate 𝐼0 (𝐱, 𝜔𝑝 )
around arbitrary positions.

3.2.1 Analysis.
The total amount of computation and raytracing performed by
RC to calculate a single bounce of light across a scene is,
𝑛
𝑁−1
𝑉 |Ω𝐼𝑛 |
𝑉 |Ω𝐼0 | 𝑁−1 𝐾
∑
=
∑
(
)
(8)
𝑠 𝑑
(Δ𝑠0 )𝑑 𝑛=0 2𝑑
𝑛=0 (Δ𝑛 )
where 𝑑 is the dimensionality of the probe structure, 𝑉 is the size
of the volume or area we are initializing probes over, and 𝑁 is
the number of cascades; with 𝑙 = 4, typically only 4 or 5 cascades
are necessary to have rays spanning the entire scene (with the last
cascade’s rays sampling the environment map upon miss).
This makes 2D implementations of RC fairly easy: We can set
𝐾 = 2 and 𝑙 = 4 (which due to the reduced dimensionality means
𝑠
Δ𝜔
𝑛 still scales the same as Δ𝑛 ), and get high quality results
with one cascade 0 (c0) probe per pixel, and 4 directions per c0
probe. We then have that 2𝐾𝑑 = 12 , so the total amount of work is
bounded for an arbitrary number of cascades (so long as there is
more than 1 probe per cascade). We can get higher quality results
setting 𝐾 = 4, however it is not necessary for most applications
and Holographic Radiance Cascades provides better results for the
same amount of computation.
In screenspace RC variants, probes are initialized at specific
points on the depth buffer, using a depth-aware interpolation
method instead of bilinear to avoid light leaking near depth discon­
tinuities. This results in the probe structure still being two-dimen­
sional. To achieve the same error scaling as 2D RC, we increase
angular resolution in both axes simultaneously, which results in

6 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

𝐾 = 4, and then 2𝐾𝑑 = 1, so all cascades have the same cost.1
However, this scaling poses a problem for full 3D RC. Suppose
we have some cascade 𝑛 having the same spatial and angular reso­
lution as a normal irradiance probe scheme (so the probes would be
spaced around 1 meter apart), and want to use RC to add increased
details for smaller scale effects. Then, we would have to add a
few cascades below 𝑛; but as 2𝐾𝑑 = 12 , each lower cascade becomes
progressively more expensive, and so the total cost becomes domi­
nated by the lower cascades. This is despite the fact that most of
the probes in the lower cascades will be wasted, as the spacing will
be fine enough that in most scenes there will be large empty areas
where probes do not contribute to any surfaces (which is not the
case for normal irradiance probe spacings). This brings us to our
first contribution.

4 Sparse Radiance Cascades
Instead of allocating a large number of probes which are not used
for future computation, we utilize a hashmap in order to sparsely
populate the RC structure near visible surfaces only. To initialize
probes near surfaces, we iterate over all pixels on screen and insert
the nearest cascade 0 (c0) probe to that point in world-space. We
then iterate over every c0 probe and initialize the nearest probe in
c1, and so on for all cascades; we show a 2d version of this in Fig. 6.
Due to how probes are spaced, this is equivalent to initializing
the nearest c𝑛 probe to each position visible. We do not initialize
all trilinear neighbors of each probe for performance reasons, as
avoiding it halves the amount of probes for little quality loss. As a
result, we need to only interpolate between existing probes, which
we do using a sparse trilinear approach: we add the values at the
existing probes used for trilinear interpolation multiplied by their
trilinear weight, and then divide by the total weight for all probes
to renormalize.
We also need to calculate ray directions for the cascades. While
in 2D just using evenly spaced angles for Ω𝐼𝑛 is the obvious and
optimal solution, in 3D there are many ways of semi-evenly distrib­
uting points on a sphere. We use the equal-area spherical mapping
in Algorithm 2 to map the unit sphere of directions to [0, 1]2 , and
then generate points 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 = DecodeDir((𝑢 + 12 )/2Θ𝑛 , (𝑣 +
1
𝐼
2
2 )/Θ𝑛 ) for some angular resolution Θ𝑛 . Then, we get Ω𝑛 =
{𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 | 𝑢 ∈ 0..2Θ𝑛 − 1, 𝑣 ∈ 0..Θ𝑛 − 1}. Having twice the reso­
lution on the 𝑥-axis is necessary to have approximately even
spacing between directions. We can easily find the nearest
c𝑛 direction to a cascade 𝑛 + 1 direction as 𝑚𝑛 (𝜔𝑛+1,𝑢,𝑣 ) =
𝜔(𝑛, ⌊𝑢/2⌋, ⌊𝑣/2⌋), which consistently maps four directions to
one.
Merging and shading pixels then follows identically to normal
RC with the adjusted interpolation method. We summarize the full
algorithm in Algorithm 1.

1 Path of Exile 2′s implementation actually uses 𝐾 = 2, however this only functions

due to tracing the depth buffer, the top-down camera view, and the vertical size/
complexity of the scene not scaling with distance.
2 Surprisingly, the octahedral [Engelhardt and Dachsbacher 2008] and Clarberg octa­
hedral [Clarberg 2008] schemes result in worse quality despite having a more uniform
distribution.

Fig. 6. Sparse probes in Radiance Cascades, with levels following the same
coloring as in Fig. 4. Obscured probes are not initialized.
Algorithm 1: Sparse Radiance Cascades
1 function SparseRC():

// Initialize probes.
for pixel 𝑝 on screen:
4
𝐱 ← world position at pixel 𝑝
5
Insert0 (Nearest0 (𝐱))
6
for cascade level 𝑛 from 1 to 𝑁 − 1:
7
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑛 − 1:
8
Insert𝑛 (Nearest𝑘 (𝐩))
9
// Trace intervals.
10
for cascade level 𝑛 from 0 to 𝑁 − 1:
11
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑛 and 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 in Ω𝐼𝑛 :
compute radiance interval 𝐽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 )
12
and transmittance 𝛽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 ) using ray tracing
13
// Merge cascades.
14
for cascade level 𝑛 from 𝑁 − 1 to 0:
15
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑛 and 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 in Ω𝐼𝑛 :
compute radiance cone 𝐼𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑛,𝑢,𝑣 )
16
from 𝐽𝑛 , 𝛽𝑛 , and 𝐼𝑛+1 using Eq. 6
17
// Shade pixels.
18
for pixel 𝑝 on screen:
19
𝐱 ← world position at pixel 𝑝
20
compute 𝐿(𝐱, 𝜔𝑜 ) using Eq. 2
// Gets the nearest probe in cascade 𝑛 to a position 𝐱.
21 function Nearest𝑛 (𝐱):
22
return Δ𝑠𝑛 (⌊𝐱/Δ𝑠𝑛 ⌋ + 12 )
// Inserts the probe at position 𝐩 (assumed to be a half-integer
multiple
// of Δ𝑠𝑛 ) into the cascade 𝑛 hashmap.
23 function Insert𝑛 (𝐩):
24
// Code omitted; see Section 6 for details.
2
3

4.1 Levels of Detail
Due to the perspective transform in (most) 3D renders, further
away objects take up less screen space, and so do not need the same
probe density as nearby objects to achieve an identical quality; ad­
ditionally, using the same probe density would result in unbounded
memory usage for very distant objects. So, we introduce a level of
detail (LOD) system for our probes in the same fashion as many

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 7

Algorithm 2: Equal-Area Spherical Mapping
1 function EncodeDir(𝜔):

𝜙 ← atan2(𝜔𝑦 , 𝜔𝑥 )
𝜙
return (frac( 2𝜋
), (𝜔𝑧 + 1)/2)
4 function DecodeDir(𝑢, 𝑣):
5
𝜙 ← 𝑢 ⋅ 2𝜋
6
𝑧←√
2𝑣 − 1
7
𝑟 ← 1 − 𝑧2
8
return (𝑟 ⋅ cos(𝜙), 𝑟 ⋅ sin(𝜙), 𝑧)
2
3

Fig. 7. An illustration of over-occlusion by Fig. 8. Error from probes being recessed into surfaces in
Bistro [Lumberyard 2017]; c0 rays start from 𝑡−1 = Δ𝑠0 .
25% due to probe positioning.

other radiance probe algorithms.3 Each probe stores an additional
coordinate indicating its LOD, with each higher level increasing the
probe spacing Δ𝑠0 and base ray length 𝑡0 by a factor of 2. Different
LODs do not interact with each other; probes of one LOD initialize
the nearest higher-cascade probe of the same LOD, and when
interpolating for merging and shading, we only consider probes
from the same LOD. We choose the LOD for probes upon initial­
ization based on the binary logarithm of the Chebyshev distance
from the camera (it produces fewer artifacts than Euclidian due to
the grid alignment of the probes), so that probes stay the same size
on-screen.
To prevent the seam between LODs from being visible, we
shorten the starting distance of each LOD by 0.9 to overlap with the
previous LOD, and linearly blend between them across the over­
lapping interval when computing the final on-screen irradiance.

5 Ray Splitting
However, this version of Sparse Radiance Cascades still has a stan­
dard flaw of radiance probe techniques: probe positions can end
up blocked within objects, which causes unnecessary darkening
when interpolating. This is amplified as we intentionally spawn
probes near surfaces rather than in open space. Even if we adjust
c0 rays to start away from the probe position to avoid the worst
of the problem, probe positions being recessed into surfaces can
still cause bias due to rays facing outwards from the surface being
occluded immediately, as shown in Fig. 7. The result of these errors
are demonstrated in Fig. 8.
To solve this problem, we take inspiration from SHaRC [NVIDIA
2024]: we do not need to spawn rays exactly from the probe posi­
tions; instead, we can spawn rays from surfaces on-screen (so that
they are not immediately occluded), and insert them into our probe
structure.
Radiance Cascades uses merging to assemble multiple intervals
into an infinite ray to reconstruct radiance. In ray splitting, we
invert this by splitting rays into multiple intervals to deposit into
our RC data structure. Suppose we have a ray starting at position
𝐱 in direction 𝜔 hitting at a distance 𝑡, where 𝑡𝑛−1 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑛 . Then,
we know that the 𝑛th cascade is occluded in that direction, and
all lower ones are transparent. So, for all cascades 𝑘 < 𝑛, we can
estimate 𝐽𝑖 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 𝟎, 𝛽𝑖 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 1, where 𝐩 = Nearest𝑘 (𝐱)
3 In a rather unfortunate coincidence, most literature refers to this as ‘cascades’ (e.g.

cascaded shadow maps), however to avoid confusion we will refer to them as LODs
exclusively.

and 𝜔𝑝 = 𝑚𝑘 (𝜔) are the nearest probe position and direction to the
ray in that cascade. Similarly, for the 𝑛th cascade we can conclude
that 𝐽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 𝐿𝑖 (𝐱, 𝜔) and 𝛽𝑛 (𝐩, 𝜔𝑝 ) = 0.
We then deposit these values into the associated probe and direc­
tion in the hashmap. Since there may be multiple contributions, we
modify the hashmap to store a cumulative sum of all radiance and
transmittance values deposited into that direction, and compute
the actual 𝐽𝑛 and 𝛽𝑛 values for merging by dividing by the number
of rays deposited.
There are two ways of handling higher cascades: We can either
choose to not deposit anything to them, as the ray did not hit
anything within the intervals they cover, or we can extend the ray
to all remaining cascades and deposit the same radiance and zero
transmittance to them as well. However, the latter option results in
noticeable bias due to shorter rays providing a larger contribution
to the final radiance when averaged together, so we choose the
former option (although it is a little noisier).
Our algorithm then proceeds as follows: After initializing
probes, we spawn rays from surfaces displayed on screen, and
for each ray we atomically add the radiance and transmittance
contributions (and increment the count) to the nearest probe and
direction in each cascade level that the ray provides information
for. After all rays are deposited, we merge as normal, but ignore
directions with zero count to prevent division by zero.

5.1 Sampling
One concern with the ray splitting algorithm is that there is no
guarantee that every direction of every probe will have at least one
value before merging. In fact, this is somewhat a feature: probe
directions that point into surfaces will not be used in the final
calculation so we avoid computing them unnecessarily by only
spawning rays facing away from surfaces. Similarly, in an enclosed
room all rays may terminate before reaching the 𝑛th cascade and
we would not end up depositing anything to it; but if that is the
case, the lower cascades must be fully opaque, and so we would not
read anything from the 𝑛th cascade either.
However, we need all used directions to be filled in order to
avoid noise. Conveniently, each cascade requires approximately
the same number of rays to achieve this: if we consider a scene only
containing a flat axis-aligned plane, then each cascade has 4x less
probes than the previous, but each probe has 4x more directions
(assuming 𝐾 = 4), so the total number of directions is constant
per cascade. Most scenes have the same scaling due to being effec­

8 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

tively two-dimensional, with the exception of foliage and thin rods.
Additionally, due to our level of detail system, probes in the same
cascade are likely to have similar projected size on-screen (so long
as the camera is not seeing them obliquely) so we can ensure that
they all get enough rays by spawning a constant number per pixel.
Simply using uniformly random directions results in significant
inefficiencies. Higher cascades become significantly less likely to
be filled in than the base cascade, as by the coupon collector’s
problem [Tan et al. 2025] the amount of samples required to fill 𝑘
buckets scales with 𝑂(𝑘 log 𝑘), and each higher cascade has expo­
nentially more buckets per probe.
So, we use the 𝑅2 low-discrepancy sequence [Roberts 2018] to
generate points on the unit square, which we then map to direc­
tions using the equal-area mapping in Algorithm 2. We need that
at each cascade level, all directions are semi-uniformly covered by
rays, so we assign probes that share the same nearest next-cascade
probe to contiguous segments of the 𝑅2 sequence so that the rays
for the next-cascade probe are also a contiguous segment of the
sequence and so are evenly distributed. The entire sequence is then
jittered to distribute errors temporally. This is done similarly to a
hierarchical prefix-sum; we first count the number of rays within
each probe from lowest to highest cascade, and then compute
offsets for probes in reverse order. We show pseudocode for this
in Algorithm 3, and demonstrate the improvement over random
sampling in Fig. 9.
Random

R2

Algorithm 3: Ray Generation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Fig. 9. Comparison of uniform random sampling and 𝑅2 -based sampling
for a single frame of Bistro.

5.2 Temporal Accumulation
An additional benefit of this approach is that we can easily tempo­
rally accumulate rays: In a semi-static scene, there is no need to
fully recompute probes that existed in previous frames; instead,
we can blend the previous frame’s cascades with the new intervals
from the current frame. As our algorithm functions entirely in
world-space, we do not need to worry about reprojection due to
camera movement (we leave handling movable objects to future
work). We can additionally use this to reduce the number of rays
traced per frame by only tracing rays until we reach a certain target
number; however as this is dependent on the amount of disocclu­
sion in the last frame, for the purposes of benchmarking we will
assume that every frame casts the full number of rays.

6 Implementation
We implement our algorithm in Rust using the LuisaCompute
[Zheng et al. 2022] framework as an abstraction over CUDA. Ray­
tracing is handled by OptiX.

// Input: A global 2d temporal noise value.
function GenerateRays(jitter):
num_rays ← {𝐩 ↦ 0 | 𝐩 a probe}
for pixel 𝑝 on screen:
𝐱 ← world position at pixel 𝑝
num_rays[Nearest0 (𝐱)] += 1
for cascade level 𝑛 from 1 to 𝑁 − 1:
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑛 − 1:
num_rays[Nearest𝑛 (𝐩)] += num_rays[𝐱]
offset ← {}
global_offset ← 0
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑁 − 1:
offset[𝐩] ← global_offset
global_offset += num_rays[𝐩]
for cascade level 𝑛 from 𝑁 − 2 to 0:
for probe 𝐩 in cascade 𝑛 + 1:
local_offset ← offset[𝐩]
for probe 𝐪 in cascade 𝑛 where Nearest𝑛+1 (𝐪) = 𝐩:
offset[𝐪] ← local_offset
local_offset += num_rays[𝐪]
for pixel 𝑝 on screen:
𝐱 ← world position at pixel 𝑝
𝐩 ← Nearest0 (𝐱)
𝑢𝑣 ← 𝑅2 (offset[𝐩])
offset[𝐩] += 1
𝜔 ← DecodeDir(𝑢𝑣 + jitter mod 1)
// flip inwards-pointing directions
⃗
𝜔 ← 𝜔 ⋅ sign(𝜔 ⋅ 𝒏(𝐱))
spawn ray from 𝐱 in direction 𝜔

Hashmap. We create a separate hashmap for each cascade to
store radiance and transmittance. For the key, we encode the probe
position as a 64-bit integer, using 18 bits for each coordinate axis
and 10 for the LOD, in order to do insertion locklessly with linear
probing and atomic operations. The hashmap values are very large
as each contains all directions for a single probe, so we instead
store an index into an indirection buffer containing the actual data.
This allows us to run our hashmap at very low occupancy without
consuming a large amount of memory. Additionally, we recreate
our hashmaps every frame from the indirection buffer, so we can
easily remove old probes without having to handle deletion in the
hashmap itself.
Merging. We store directional data such as 𝐽𝑛 , 𝛽𝑛 , and 𝐼𝑛 in
Morton order, which ensures that at each cascade, the data for all
directions which are merged into the same direction in the lower
cascade are stored contiguously. As a result, our merging function
can do coherent reads during merging, and use warp-wide shuffles
to share the data between threads to average the cones together.
We additionally perform pre-averaging: since the only use of 𝐼𝑛
for cascades higher than 0 is to merge into the lower cascade,
we directly compute the averaged value used for the next step of
merging rather than storing them separately. Another optimization
we use is to make each block of our merging shader responsible for
only a single probe; this means that the higher-cascade probes used

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 9

for interpolation are shared across the block, so we can perform
lookups for them in parallel using shared memory.
Shading. For the final shading step, we need to compute the
outgoing radiance via the rendering equation. If we do this naively
by gathering all directions for the nearest probes and interpolating
them for each pixel, the cost quickly becomes prohibitive: for 32
c0 directions, this results in up to 256 unfiltered texture samples
per pixel. To avoid this, we can precompute directional irradiance
for each probe by evaluating the rendering equation for each
direction (assuming that the BRDF is Lambertian), and store this
in a texture. Then, we sample this texture in the direction of the
normal for the nearest probes and interpolate those values to get
the final radiance, which is a maximum of 8 filtered texture sam­
ples per pixel. Specifically, we calculate a 6x6 octahedral-mapped
[Engelhardt and Dachsbacher 2008] irradiance field, and then do
an additional copying pass to add a single-texel border around the
texture to handle interpolation at the edges.
Multibounce. We extend our algorithm to support multiple
bounces by using the hit point of rays traced in the previous
frame to spawn rays and probes for a secondary cache. We then
sample from the secondary cache for all ray hits (which allows the
secondary cache to sample itself for ‘infinite’ bounces via temporal
accumulation). As most of the algorithm is screen-independent,
we can reuse our probe initialization, ray generation, and merging
code, with the only change being the input normal and positions.
We do not initialize probes that require three bounces currently.
We use secondary cache probes that are two levels of detail
higher than the equivalent primary cache to reduce cost, as the
second bounce information is not directly displayed and so does
not need to be as precise.

7 Results
We use length scaling 𝑙 = 4, branching factor 𝐾 = 4, base number
of directions |Ω𝐼0 | = 32 (using Θ0 = 4), base ray length 𝑡0 ≈
1.6Δ𝑠0 , and 𝑁 = 4 cascades. We also compare to an implementa­
tion of DDGI, which we implemented following Majercik et al.
[2021] with the final shading directly translated from the RTXGIDDGI implementation [NVIDIAGameWorks 2024].
Performance. Our method takes approximately the same amount
of time in most of our tests as probes quantity is nearly constant
due to LODs. We break down the performance of each stage of
our algorithm in Table 2; stage names follow Algorithm 1, with
Generate rays referring to Algorithm 3, and Trace rays being the
calculation of the spawned rays. We have not included the cost for
creating the G-buffer or tracing shadow rays, as those steps are not
specific to our algorithm. Note that these metrics are not indicative
of the maximum possible performance for Split RC as our imple­
mentation is missing many micro-optimizations; for example, it is
currently using 32-bit floats to store radiance.

Table 2. Performance breakdown of single-frame Split RC for Fig. 10 and
Fig. 13, running on a RTX 3080 Laptop GPU. All numbers are in millisec­
onds.
Stage

Sponza

San Miguel

Initialize probes

1.2

1.3

Generate rays

0.4

0.6

Trace rays

1.3

4.5

Deposit

2.2

1.9

Merge

1.0

0.8

Shade pixels

2.5

2.4

Total

8.6

11.5

The Trace Rays stage is entirely dependent on raytracing perfor­
mance, and so is highly variable: the San Miguel scene has
complex geometry such as foliage, and so takes 3x more time to
trace than Sponza.
Quality. We showcase Split RC in the Sponza (©︎ Frank Meinl),
San Miguel (©︎ Guillermo M. Leal Llaguno), and Conference
Room (©︎ Anat Grynberg and Greg Ward) scenes [McGuire 2017].
We show single-frame evaluations of our algorithm, as temporal
accumulation can hide performance problems and has behavior
dependent on camera movement, which is hard to measure. As
most other real-time global illumination algorithms utilize tempo­
ral accumulation, we also show a converged version using a smaller
probe spacing and ten frames of accumulation; due to the structure
of RC, there is little benefit of increasing sampling past that point
as most remaining error is from interpolation. Apart from in Fig. 1
and Fig. 12, we only show a single bounce of light in our images,
as secondary bounces reduce contrast and make errors harder to
distinguish. DDGI results are computed using a 32x16x32 probe
grid and accumulated until there is no noise (apart from the 1 frame
version in Fig. 10). We note a few features of our algorithm:
• Shadows: Our method can capture soft penumbrae particularly
well, as seen in Fig. 11; the cascade level that captures the penum­
bra increases with the distance to the occluder, which results in
the spatial discretization of radiance matching the penumbra’s
width across the entire scene.
• Ambient Occlusion: Our method can provide medium-scale am­
bient occlusion effects as probes are spaced finely on-screen; this
is shown clearly in the second row of cutouts for Fig. 10. DDGI
does not show any ambient occlusion, which is a natural result
of its probe spacing being larger than the distance from the wall
to the banner.
• Artifacts: Split RC misses details smaller than the base probe
spacing, as seen in Fig. 15, and can also exhibit light leaking
artifacts from interpolation during merging, which results in
brightening of shadows in Fig. 10. The small number of c0
directions can also contribute to bias, although the loss in visual
quality is minimal. Additionally, Split RC has overblurring when
trying to resolve hard shadows: in Fig. 13, the shadow of the plant
in the cutout loses some of the details apparent in the reference.

10 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

Split RC

DDGI

Sparse RC

Split RC (1 frame)

DDGI (1 frame)

Reference

Split RC

DDGI

Split RC (1 frame)

DDGI (1 frame)

Sparse RC

Reference

Fig. 10. Comparison of Split RC, DDGI, normal Sparse RC (single frame), and a path-traced reference for the Sponza scene. DDGI (1 frame) was computed
in a single frame with an equal ray count to Split RC (1 frame); it has 1666 probes contributing to surfaces on-screen with 1245 rays each.
Split RC (1 frame)

DDGI

Split RC, single bounce

Reference

Split RC, multibounce

Split RC
(1 frame)

DDGI

Reference

Fig. 11. Comparison of single-frame Split RC, DDGI, and a path-traced reference for Sponza near the Fig. 12. Comparison between normal and multi­
first cutout in Fig. 10. DDGI fails to resolve the penumbra due to it being smaller than the probe spacing. bounce Split RC in the Conference Room scene.

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 11

DDGI

Split RC (1 frame)

Reference

Split RC

Split RC

Split RC (1 frame)
DDGI
Reference
Fig. 13. Comparison of Split RC, DDGI, and a path-traced reference for the San Miguel scene. The shadows cast by the foilage are missed by DDGI due to
probes being relocated away from the occluding geometry, while Split RC overblurs them.

7.1 Extensions
In this section, we demonstrate a few additional capabilities of our
algorithm which we have not fully developed.
Specular Effects. As mentioned in Section 3.2, the RC data struc­
ture can be used to efficiently approximate single rays without
additional tracing by combining intervals in the same direction.
We can use this to handle rough specular effects by approximating
it with a cone: we lookup the cascade with 𝐼𝑛 size similar to our
target (for example in Fig. 14, this would be cascade 2) and merge it
with 𝐽𝑛 from previous cascades to get the result. Unfortunately we
cannot use RC for precise effects such as reflections as the spatial
resolution loss of higher cascades becomes very apparent, so for
a full rendering system this would need to be combined with a
different algorithm.
Diffuse + Specular

removes problems detecting features smaller than the base probe
spacing; we show a comparison of this in Fig. 15. Our current un­
optimized implementation uses directional radiance information
for each pixel, which requires an expensive gather step rather than
just sampling irradiance; this takes an additional 23ms per frame,
despite the actual C(-1) calculation only being 1.4ms extra. This is
avoidable by treating C(-1) as an ambient term instead and multi­
plying with the radiance, however that would result in the loss of
directional lighting information.
Normal

With C(-1)

Reference

Diffuse Only

Specular Only

Fig. 14. Specular effects with Split RC. Notice that in the bottom right
corner some spatial grid artifacts are noticeable in addition to the blurring.

C(-1) merging. Instead of starting c0 rays from the probe position,
we can start them from a small distance 𝑡−1 (commonly set to be
Δ𝑠0 for normal RC as that can prevent aliasing) and merge the
values with a “cascade −1”, which we calculate at every pixel with
screen-space raymarching similarly to Therrien et al. [2022]. This

Fig. 15. Comparison of a close-up view of normal Split RC and Split RC
with C(-1) merging. The leaves on the pillar have details smaller than the
c0 probe spacing, resulting in normal RC being unable to capture their
shadows, while C(-1) merging can capture them well.

Denoising. Our formulation of Split RC traces a ray from each pixel,
and then uses those rays, in combination with normal, depth, and
(assumed to be Lambertian) BRDF to compute a filtered image. As
such, we can treat it as a denoiser that utilizes occlusion and hit
depth to decide whether rays can be shared between nearby pixels.
Considering it in this fashion, we can compare to other denoisers
with the same input ray information. We choose OIDN [Áfra 2026]

12 • Rouli Freeman, and Alexander Sannikov

as a comparison as it is primarily designed for offline use with
no temporal information, and has a simple CPU-based API, which
makes integration easy. We show these results in Fig. 16.
Raw

Reference

OIDN

Split RC

Raw
Reference
OIDN
Split RC
Fig. 16. Comparison of Split RC as a denoiser against OIDN. Ray directions
for the raw image are computed using the sampling strategy in Section 5.1.
The lion head is undersampled in the raw image, which results in signif­
icant loss of detail in OIDN, whereas Split RC is able to reconstruct it well.

Admittedly, this is a somewhat unfair comparison; OIDN is
designed to take in radiance which has already been accumulated
from multiple samples per pixel so it cannot use per-ray informa­
tion like Split RC.

8 Conclusion
We have introduced a new method for 3D global illumination based
on sparse world-space Radiance Cascades. Our method is capable
of calculating a diffuse bounce efficiently without the need for
temporal accumulation, and providing effects ranging from ambi­
ent occlusion to environment mapping within the same algorithm,
while degrading gracefully for patterns too thin to accurately re­
solve. In addition, ray splitting avoids the standard issue of probebased methods requiring careful positioning of probes, which is not
completely ameliorated with standard sparse RC, and reduces the
amount of rays required by the total number of cascades.
Ray splitting can be interpreted as an extension of path filtering
techniques to filter radiance intervals rather than full rays, with
longer intervals using a larger filter size and being occluded by
shorter intervals.
We also demonstrate a new argument for the effectiveness of
Radiance Cascades: that the errors induced by spatial and angular
discretization should be simultaneously minimized, which requires
multiple probe levels due to the angular error scaling with ray
length. This argument drives our choice of scaling factor.

8.1 Limitations and Future Work
As RC captures the radiance field up to a certain frequency, it is
incapable of resolving certain phenomena such as sharp mirror re­
flections. Additionally, Split RC can exhibit light leaking and other
artifacts, particularly for geometry smaller than the base probe
spacing, and is inherently biased due to use of interpolated probes.
The primary difficulty with our ray splitting scheme is that it
requires finding rays that are evenly distributed across all cascades.
While our current approach achieves this goal better than using
white or blue noise distributed directions, there is still plenty of
room for improvement; spawning rays from pixels results in up to a
4x ray quantity difference between the nearest and furthest probes
within the same LOD, so approaches using a fixed ray budget per
probe are worth investigating.
Our temporal accumulation method is very naive; a better
approach would be to allocate more rays towards newly spawned
probes (although this re-raises the question of how to evenly dis­
tribute rays), and reduce the amount of rays for older probes unless
there is a change in lighting, with the aid of a multi-scale mean
estimator or other methods of adaptive averaging.
Finally, it may be possible to represent Split RC entirely as a
denoiser without hashing or additional storage, which could allow
it to be used as a drop-in replacement for existing denoisers over
low sample count path tracers while retaining the benefits of RC.

References
Nikolaus Binder, Sascha Fricke, and Alexander Keller. 2021. Massively Parallel Path
Space Filtering. https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05942.
Guillaume Boissé, Sylvain Meunier, Heloise de Dinechin, et al. 2023. GI-1.0: A Fast and
Scalable Two-level Radiance Caching Scheme for Real-time Global Illumination.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19855.
Petrik Clarberg. 2008. Fast equal-area mapping of the (hemi)sphere using SIMD.
Journal of Graphics Tools 13, 3 (2008), 53–68.
Max Coppen. 2025. Surfel Radiance Cascades. https://github.com/mxcop/src-dgi.
Rouslan Dimitrov. 2007. Cascaded Shadow Maps. https://developer.download.nvidia.
com/SDK/10.5/opengl/src/cascaded_shadow_maps/doc/cascaded_shadow_maps.
pdf.
Thomas Engelhardt and Carsten Dachsbacher. 2008. Octahedron Environment Maps.
International Symposium on Vision, Modeling, and Visualization (Jan. 2008), 383–
388.
Rouli Freeman, Alexander Sannikov, and Adrian Margel. 2025. Holographic Radiance
Cascades for 2D Global Illumination. https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02041.
Gene Greger, Peter Shirley, Philip M. Hubbard, and Donald P. Greenberg. 1998. The
irradiance volume. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 18, 2 (1998), 32–43.
https://doi.org/10.1109/38.656788.
Henrik Halen, Andreas Brinck, Kyle Hayward, and Xiangshun Bei. 2021. SIGGRAPH
21: Global Illumination Based on Surfels.
https://www.ea.com/seed/news/
siggraph21-global-illumination-surfels.
James T. Kajiya. 1986. The Rendering Equation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Pro­
ceedings of SIGGRAPH) 20, 4 (Aug. 1986), 143–150. https://doi.org/10.1145/15922.
15902.
Jaroslav Krivanek, Pascal Gautron, Sumanta N. Pattanaik, and Kadi Bouatouch. 2005.
Radiance caching for efficient global illumination computation. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 5 (2005), 550–561. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2005.83.
Daqi Lin, Markus Kettunen, Benedikt Bitterli, Jacopo Pantaleoni, Cem Yuksel, and
Chris Wyman. 2022. Generalized Resampled Importance Sampling: Foundations
of ReSTIR. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 2022) 41, 4
(2022), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530158.

Split Radiance Cascades: Real-Time Global Illumination via Sparse Radiance Probes • 13

Amazon Lumberyard. 2017. Amazon Lumberyard Bistro, Open Research Content
Archive (ORCA). http://developer.nvidia.com/orca/amazon-lumberyard-bistro.
Zander Majercik, Jean-Philippe Guertin, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Morgan
McGuire. 2019. Dynamic Diffuse Global Illumination with Ray-Traced Irradiance
Fields. Journal of Computer Graphics Techniques (JCGT) 8, 2 (June 2019), 1–30.
http://jcgt.org/published/0008/02/01/.
Zander Majercik, Adam Marrs, Josef Spjut, and Morgan McGuire. 2021. Scaling ProbeBased Real-Time Dynamic Global Illumination for Production. Journal of Computer
Graphics Techniques (JCGT) 10, 2 (May 2021), 1–29. http://jcgt.org/published/
0010/02/01/.
Mathis. 2024. Radiance Cascades 3D. https://www.shadertoy.com/view/X3XfRM.
Morgan McGuire. 2017. Computer Graphics Archive. https://casual-effects.com/data.
NVIDIA. 2024. Spatially Hashed Radiance Cache. https://github.com/NVIDIA-RTX/
SHARC.
NVIDIAGameWorks. 2024. RTX Global Illumination. https://github.com/NVIDIAGa
meWorks/RTXGI-DDGI.
Christopher M. J. Osborne and Alexander Sannikov. 2024. Radiance Cascades: A
Novel High-Resolution Formal Solution for Multidimensional Non-LTE Radiative
Transfer. https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14425.
Yaobin Ouyang, Shiqiu Liu, Markus Kettunen, Matt Pharr, and Jacopo Pantaleoni.
2021. ReSTIR GI: Path Resampling for Real-Time Path Tracing. Computer Graphics
Forum (Proceedings of High Performance Graphics) 40, 8 (June 2021), 17–29. https://
doi.org/10.1111/cgf.14378.
Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. 1984. Compositing digital images. Computer Graphics
18, 3 (Jan. 1984), 253–259. https://doi.org/10.1145/964965.808606.
Tobias Ritschel, Carsten Dachsbacher, Thorsten Grosch, and Jan Kautz. 2012. The State
of the Art in Interactive Global Illumination. Computer Graphics Forum 31, 1 (2012),
160–188. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2012.02093.x https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2012.02093.x.
Martin Roberts. 2018. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Quasirandom Se­
quences. https://extremelearning.com.au/unreasonable-effectiveness-ofquasirandom-sequences/.
Tianlong Ruan. 2026. The Evolution of Real-Time Global Illumination in 'Love and
Deepspace'. Game Developers Conference.
Alexander Sannikov. 2023. Radiance Cascades: A Novel Approach to Calculating
Global Illumination. https://github.com/Raikiri/RadianceCascadesPaper.
Andrew Tan, Oriel Limor, Daniella Bar-Lev, Ryan Gabrys, Zohar Yakhini, and Paul
H. Siegel. 2025. The Labeled Coupon Collector Problem. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2507.15231.
Wolfgang Tatzgern, Alexander Weinrauch, Pascal Stadlbauer, Joerg H. Mueller, Martin
Winter, and Markus Steinberger. 2024. Radiance Caching with On-Surface Caches
for Real-Time Global Illumination. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques 7, 3 (Aug. 2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3675382.
Olivier Therrien, Yannick Levesque, and Guillaume Gilet. 2022. Screen space indirect
lighting with visibility bitmask. The Visual Computer 39, 11 (Nov. 2022), 5925–5936.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-022-02703-y.
Daniel Wright, Krzysztof Narkowicz, and Patrick Kelly. 2022. Lumen: Real-time Global
Illumination in Unreal Engine 5. Advances in Real-Time Rendering in Games (2022).
Shaokun Zheng, Zhiqian Zhou, Xin Chen, et al. 2022. LuisaRender: A High-Perfor­
mance Rendering Framework with Layered and Unified Interfaces on Stream
Architectures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) 41, 6
(Nov. 2022), 232:1–232:19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3550454.3555463.
Attila T. Áfra. 2026. Intel® Open Image Denoise. https://www.openimagedenoise
.org/.

A 2x vs 4x Length Scaling
In this appendix, we compare the quality of Radiance Cascades
with different length scaling factors. For clarity, we show results in
2D, and use branching factor 𝐾 = 2 to replicate the same angular
resolution changes across cascades as 𝐾 = 4 has in 3D. We show
these results in Fig. 17. As RC functions independently of scene
complexity, this simple test case is sufficient to demonstrate the
performance of both scaling factors in the general case.

𝑙 = 4, 𝑡0 = 1

𝑙 = 4, 𝑡0 = 0.5

𝑙 = 4, 𝑡0 = 1.5

𝑙 = 2, 𝑡0 = 24

𝑙 = 2, 𝑡0 = 12

𝑙 = 2, 𝑡0 = 36

Fig. 17. Comparison of different length scaling factors for RC for a single
light source and occluder. All images use 32 directions per c0 probe with
one c0 probe per pixel (using units Δ𝑠0 = 1), and are taken at a resolution
of 2048x768. We chose c0 ray length 𝑡0 for the large images so that aliasing
is barely apparent.

In the 𝑙 = 4 examples, aliasing (insufficient angular resolution) and
blurring (insufficient spatial resolution) appear consistently across
the image; in 𝑡0 = 1.5, aliasing is the only error apparent while
in 𝑡0 = 0.5 the same is true for blurring, and in 𝑡0 = 1 they are
balanced. In contrast, for 𝑙 = 2, the error gradually changes from
aliasing to blurring as the distance from the light increases; all three
examples have blurring at the rightmost part of the image and even
the 𝑡0 = 12 example has an overly-sharp penumbra right next to
the occluder.
Curiously, the optimal result for 𝑙 = 4 being 𝑡0 = 1.0 dis­
agrees with our prediction that the correct term to optimize is
min(Δ𝑠 , Δ𝜔 ); with 32 directions, the c0 ray length should be
32 𝑠
around 2𝜋
Δ0 ≈ 5.09Δ𝑠0 to have Δ𝑠 = Δ𝜔 instead. We believe this
is due to the aliasing from angular error being more noticeable than
blurring; in our actual Split RC implementation, we usually have
multiple rays per direction, which reduces the aliasing and makes
a longer ray length be optimal.

